hi guys so i've been thinking about
doing an
incremental reading stream or video for
a long time
um just where i basically open sm
go through my queue and basically people
can just watch
um sort of what uh someone who's been
using
sm for a while actually does day to day
but i've also been kind of reluctant to
make that kind of video just because
it's very difficult to make this kind of
this kind of content interesting and
engaging for people
who are watching and i think a large
um sort of component of that is
due to the fact that incremental reading
um doing space repetition items
uh it's all kind of an internal internal
process for their learner so
um it's not very easy for
someone to sort of uh think aloud while
they're doing incremental reading and
make it interesting for the people
watching
um but what i thought i'd do is try and
take inspiration from
those wonderful call of duty
commentaries that i grew up on
as a kid and i'm going to try and
commentate the process
where i can and where there are periods
where i'm just not talking at all and
i'm just focused on
reading or taking extracts or creating
items or whatever
i'll go back during the editing process
and
add some commentary and try and give you
some insight into
what was going on in my mind um
so yeah i'll basically today i'll just
be focusing on
topics i think i set the sorting queue
purely to topics so i'm just gonna be
doing reading because
i find watching people do that item is
pretty boring
and i don't want you guys to enjoy that
so that's about it so without further
ado i guess i'll just
get into it
all right
so this was the first session back doing
incremental reading
after perhaps a month or so where i did
basically hardly any
incremental reading or incremental
writing or anything else with supermemo
i basically just focused on programming
and tried to get my items finished which
i didn't always do
so it seems like the last time i'd used
sm or perhaps in the period um when i
was using sm quite heavily
uh a months ago i had made a bunch of
extracts about the
explore exploit problem so they
are going to feature pretty heavily
during this session today
and i guess i should probably briefly
explain
what exactly is the explore exploit
problem it basically refers to
problems where you have to balance
resources for example time between
exploring new options trying to find a
new best option
and exploiting the best option you've
already found to gain some sort of value
or benefit
and basically the canonical example of
this
is the multi-armed bandit problem which
basically refers to a casino which
contains a bunch of slot machines and
you have to allocate your money between
slot machines
to try and sample each slot machine and
find out which one has the best
win loss ratio basically and
you need to find a balance between
trying new slot machines
and just uh putting your money into the
slot machine that has
given you the greatest expected value so
far
so obviously this has many applications
in the real world like
in clinical trials
also learning of course you know you've
got to balance your time between
uh searching for new exciting areas that
you can learn about
and learning about those areas that you
already know to have
useful information in them
interestingly it's also a very difficult
problem to solve the explore exploit
problem
i read on wikipedia that
allied scientists they airdropped this
problem
over germany during world war ii to get
german scientists to waste their time
trying to solve it
so that's pretty interesting
i um
i like to make these
sorts of items uh that
ask about something fundamental and
simple
and my sort of the logic behind that
even though i think right now that i
will definitely
remember these items and so perhaps
you'd say well there's no point in
making the item the logic behind making
the item anyway is that
if you get an item correct
in sm um every time you are shown it
you will only be be shown it six times
perhaps
over a lifetime which is such a trivial
investment
in terms of time to remember
such an important and fundamental fact
that i i always think that it's worth
to um sort of solidify the fundamentals
of a subject
and i think that probably differs with
um the approaches of many other people
and
part of it comes down to perhaps what
algorithm you're using for
example if you're using an algorithm
that does give you a higher rep load
even if you get every
repetition right over a lifetime then
you're going to be more cautious in
terms of which items you make you might
only be
willing to um
make those items that are extremely
important to you
and that you know you can get right um
but
to me to me it is so
important to remember the fundamentals
and the costs seem so low that i always
just
i'll always take um something nice like
this
oh yeah one other thing i'll say is that
whenever you see these
magical arrows this is just my
uh syntax sort of uh indicating that
this is a note that i wrote myself
rather than being part of
whatever i extracted this uh paragraph
from
um it has it serves literally no purpose
other than to
simply indicate that fact uh but yeah
um i really like this framing of
the explore exploit trade-off as
a sort of conflict or tension uh
competing for your attention um the
attention economy is always something
that
i'm talking about with uh nice and
strategy for example on the podcast so
uh yeah i really like this framing
from peter whittle
but i don't have really anything more to
add
so what i'll do is i'll just
i'll increase the priority i want to see
this again
i want it to be shown to me early in my
queue
the next time i see it so i'll
update the priority and just move on
oh yeah and the importance of the
interval in the uh
importance of time how long you decide
to spend for example in the casino
that's also important but yeah i don't
really have anything to add at this time
so i'm just going to move on
to the next stuff in my queue
see this is really that's really
important information and i love that
it's given an
instance of why uh traditional clinical
trials they can be
um unethical
and uh inferior to
other sorts of um experiments for
example using thompson sampling instead
but i just can't think of a good way to
formulate this right now
please leave a comment if you do find a
good way to formulate this
um because i think it would make a
really good uh really good item
i just can't think of a good way to
frame it
i actually posted this short paragraph
up on twitter and i'd love to draw on
the collective intelligence
and expertise of the audience to help me
formulate this
this item so if you have any good ideas
you can follow me at
experia learning that's like experiment
without the mint
and learning yeah i'd love to hear your
ideas
i was kind of thinking about you know
what instances of the
explore exploit problem can i think
about in real life and one of them that
i really like
is uh you know how does the meta
you know the the um how does the meta
change in online video games so for
example
in i've never played league of legends
but i know this is
this is surely one of the things that is
discussed amongst
league of legend nerds you know what's
the best um
character to pick what's the best hero
to choose how should you
arrange um each character on the map uh
in order to give yourself the best
sort of strategic advantage increase
your chance of winning
so when you're in a league of legends
team should you
invest resources into sort of just
choosing the dominant meta
that everyone sort of converged on and
that is sort of publicly known or should
you invest time
into finding alternative strategies that
other people won't expect that could
then become the new dominant meta
right and so i think a classic example
of that is the frostbury frostbury flop
you know what i've got the internet why
don't i just look
right here we go
wikipedia to the rescue as usual the
frostbury flop
popularized by dick frost fosbury i've
said it wrong
uh he brought this new
um sort of technique jumping over
backwards um
to the world's attention right so he
invested time
rather than just focusing on the
dominant meta
the dominant technique in um
in the high jump he decided to
use this what must
initially have looked like a crazy
method for uh getting over the bar
but of course it um turned out that this
was much more efficient than
the alternative traditional approach
so that's one example of like
this problem i guess the tension
that exists between acting on one's best
knowledge using the dominant meta or
just
gathering more trying to find a new one
and also where does the drive to
challenge the dominant meta come from
like why
why did dick fosbury search for this
like my hypothesis was always that
the drive to find the new dominant
matter would come from the underdog
someone who's not performing well at the
current time like
if you're already uh
if you're the incumbent it's more likely
that the challenger is going to be the
one
um exploring trying to find information
that can defeat the
incumbent strategy right so let's see
whether that's the case
what
let's look at the history of dick
fosprey
right here we go fosbury
he started experimenting at 16. he had
difficulty competing using the dominant
high jumping techniques of the period so
he must like he failed to compete
complete jumps of five feet right
so he couldn't even get into these track
meets right this dominant technique he's
the underdog
the straddle method is the dominant
technique
oh yes this is excellent all right i
don't know why and opened
an edge i'm gonna have to open it in
incremental uh
explorer just to import it but uh
let's see oh what a mess
that's me later go away
all right so i'm just gonna import this
as
a child of the current element i always
do that
uh import as a child of the current
element i know it's not
um optimal like sometimes it's good to
import into
a concept new node or whatever i don't
know i just
sort of stick with what i started doing
as beginner so
all right that's super interesting i'm
glad i
uh i'm glad i checked that out
okay and i'll get a picture of him
oops did i not
okay
okay i'll take this and then
revolutionize
the high jump event with the back first
technique now known as the
yeah that'll work that'll work okay
right lower center of mass that was the
key
of his technique
okay
how interesting look he he found it
difficult to coordinate all the motions
involved in the straddle method
and began to experiment to explore
to explore
other ways of doing the high jump
excellent
i'll highlight that
so he invested more time he invested
his resources i'll just put it in more
abstract terms just to make the
the link explicit between the explore
and exploit problem which is
stated in sort of abstract terms i want
to make it
uh explicitly i want to explicitly link
it to this
instance basically so i'll formulate it
in these sort of awkward um abstract
terms
invested his resources
super cool so i'll just quickly scan
this
see if there's anything else interesting
interesting so
ah i wonder if there's a way to link
this to the clinical trial thing like
in a clinical trial perhaps fosbury you
know
he would his his coach would have you
know just forced him to continue
um using the inferior method in the
uh you know to maintain the
maintain the uh sort of
scientific approach to um finding which
method is the best you know you've got
to
run this trial and you're not allowed to
use any other method we need you to test
this just in isolation
but instead you know his coach allows
him to
allocate some of his resources
to using the flop for example in his
freshman meet right and
this sort of approach um
i mean here we can't really talk about
whether it's ethical or
unethical it's simply uh you know
sports ethics don't really come into it
in this
instance but obviously in a clinical
trial if you have people just
receiving an inferior drug for example
um then this just becomes critical it's
a life and death thing so this is
super interesting
doesn't seem to be anything else really
that interesting about
mr fosberry to me personally so we'll
get rid of the rest of it
just delete and this branch
um
i'm in two minds on the one hand this is
super interesting and i'm really glad
that i checked it out so
uh i'm actually wondering whether i
could
write maybe part of an article um
usually
what i do if i want to
turn something into an article is i'll
go to my
output folder so this input is
essentially all of my reading
videos audio and all of that stuff
my output folder is articles videos
programming projects anything that
involves
releasing creative output into the real
world that's essentially how i define it
in an abstract way so
um the frostbreathing and
sort of the changing metas in
um video games and sports
it's sufficiently interesting i think to
warrant
creating an output folder um
i actually wrote an article on my
website um experimental-learning.com
on the input output thing
it's called input and output in learning
i don't consider it finished yet
it's kind of still an idea i'm
developing but you can check it out
i'll leave a link in the description as
well
no this is completely opaque to me
really so i'm going to decrease the
priority
and also i'll increase the interval to
like
60 days so that'll give me the logic
behind doing that
sorry is that if i have 60 days
before i next see this element
i'll have had more time to learn the
prerequisite knowledge now
if i was being really
diligent about this i would actually
import
the prerequisite knowledge to understand
this or
advance um the prerequisite knowledge
that already exists in my collection
um into that interval um
like uh before the 60 day mark so that i
could learn all of the prerequisite
knowledge before this element next comes
up but
i can't really be bothered right now i
want to do some more topics so i'm just
going to
move on
right and at this point this
element has pretty much exhausted all
its use even though it's still got
um this little note attached i
pretty sure i have uh an item for this
already
it's pretty clear in my mind that these
thompson sampling and the rest of the
stuff in this
paragraph are related so i'm just gonna
get rid of it
okay aha
some ein rand i think objectivism
interesting
ah yes so okay
um i'm hoping there's going to be
someone who watches this
that can give me some insight into
um concept formation like
what really drew me to ayn rand's
um work was not
the fountain head or atlas shrugged or
any of her literature or any of that
um my first introduction to rand was
literally just reading um
the introduction to
objectivist epistemology right and
in it she basically um
her epistemology or her metaphysics it
starts with
um a really interesting discussion of
concept formation
and i don't know whether that
exists anywhere else i mean i've looked
on the internet i i
presume it does since it's surely got to
be an important part of
philosophy and cognitive science and
neuroscience
[Music]
it just occurred to me that it was super
interesting and
i knew ein rand um
isn't taken seriously by
let's say academic um philosophers or
just people who are into philosophy in
general but i just couldn't help but get
super interested in this
in this whole idea of concept formation
since
i think originally my interest in
concept formation literally came from
concepts in
superman and reading uh what was next
articles right
reading was articles um
and i don't know can anyone point me to
better
sources of information can anyone give
me uh criticisms or
back up any of the stuff that iran says
about
concept formation i'd be really
interested in reading that
and
also be good to have like maybe a source
uh sort of like a neuroscientific source
like a more low level
understanding of um what actually
what concepts are like we talk about
concepts how were they arranged in the
mind how
how do they actually manifest themselves
in terms of um
you know cell assemblies in the mind uh
in terms of neurons and
synapses and all of that stuff so
if you have any knowledge related to
that
do let me know but anyway um
i'll push through and you can um
if any question in the comments i'd be
glad to read it
it's all very abstract i'm
going to decrease the priority of this
one
although i do think it's pretty useful
especially if i want to read
more of iran's work uh
so i'll increase the interval again
in beta cells of the pancreas
release of insulin
this is pretty uninteresting honestly uh
decreased priority
to 70.
it's interesting in the sense that i
didn't realize that action potentials
were responsible
for doing this i figured action
potentials only
i i'd obviously heard of them in the
brain right electrical
activity propagating down
uh not dendrites and axon
it's pretty interesting that also occurs
in the pancreas but it's really not
mission critical knowledge so i'll just
bump down the priority to 70 and
it'll get buried in my queue for a while
maybe i'll see it sometime
later nerdy boom sound memory
voltage difference similar to the last
one
not that useful to me right now
50.
i know there's something about this the
idea that a neural network is static
and symbolic i don't know enough about
neural networks
to disagree
in a really coherent way but it doesn't
seem to line up
align with what i've seen of neural
networks so far they seem to be able to
recognize uh
like the weights of the neural in the
neural network they seem to
change in a dynamic way that i would
describe as dynamic
so i'm just gonna get rid of this one
it's causing some interference
let's just say and
i don't know if if it is truly the case
that this is true and it's
mission critical knowledge it'll come up
somewhere else
so i don't know i can feel confident uh
just removing this from my collection
sleep or the brain okay
uh i'm not really interested in the
development of a
brain
[Music]
uh but i am interested in sleep if
there's anything good on
sleep
oh this is cool
function information from the sense
organs is collected into the
brain oh yes see this sounds exactly
like
a neural network right biologically
inspired neural network
and you can see why especially when
they've written it like this
blockchain of the brain naturalized
brain
yeah this is cool i'll give this a 5.
priority i really want to see that again
perception
yeah this is good stuff anything about
the sensors
motor control as well give this
uh 16
[Music]
motor control yes
yes right why do we sleep
why do we sleep
right it's common for animals to sleep
it serves some common goal that is
consistent across many different species
where am i see this one is what
one of the interesting things about
uh super memo and probably my
idiosyncratic approach to using it
um stuff just ends up in the most random
places so
uh you can sort of follow the um since i
always import pretty much as a child
uh i can follow the tree backwards
towards the root and i can sort of see
where
um
where the initial
things i was learning started and where
i actually ended up so i started
learning about deep learning
from machine learning um
and it ended up at the brain and then
into sleep
this is pretty interesting uh
but yeah um i almost want to turn
this or somehow link it to
just a general question of why we sleep
uh so i'm super interested in that
and was written a lot about it and i've
read
a lot of what he's written about sleep
but
um it really seems like we don't
know for sure a whole lot about um what
the purpose
and function of sleep is and so
i'd really like to explore this in more
depth
for now i'll just extract it
uh it's a bit of nine
why not
learning a memory oh yes
give me a fight
how brains perform computation
that's pretty interesting
yeah that sounds pretty cool
how is a boring computer
i read this really good book by melanie
mitchell
i think it's called a
complexity a guided tour that was it
melanie mitchell
and i recommend it it was super good
and she talked a little bit about um
computation in living things
and it was really interesting for
example one of the
one of the items i had from that book
was like
um dna encodes
dna is like the like a programming
language but it also encodes
its own interpreter inside of it inside
of itself so it encodes like the
ribosomes and
all of the stuff that interprets the dna
along with it and i thought that was
super interesting a lot of
analogies there to be made between
computation uh digital computation
and just computation in the abstract
general sense of you know
biological organisms algorithms
everything
very interesting
yes there we go
i'm sure all of that history is so much
that's so much interesting stuff
in it but this this is the real gold
these are the golden nuggets right here
computational neuroscience
analogies to be made between electronic
computers and the brain
information theory what is information
how do we process it
is the brain an information processing
system
cybernetics computational neuroscience
oh
i got too excited there and lost my
place
yeah here we go
yes the action potential see we're
getting more about the action potential
i've definitely heard these names before
huxley i think cats as well
the great topmost sheet of the mass that
we're hardly at light had twinkled or
moved
becomes now a sparkling field of
rhythmic flashing points
it's a really nice way of putting it i
wonder if with this part the great
topmost sheet of the mass
i would have wonder whether with the
mass he's referring to the brain at
the great topmost sheet as the neocortex
i've heard
like the neocortex just described as
this like sheet
around the brain i wonder if that's it
yeah here we go neural networks very
cool
neural algorithms
even single neurons appear to be complex
and capable of
performing computations
awesome four
let's talk quality stuff my god
ah brain is food damn
that's horrible
wow my goodness
right as for the rest of the article
um not so interested
i uh there is good stuff in there
i'll leave it but i'll de-prioritize it
it's not
uh the main stuff that i wanted to get
in the sleep
uh sensors
and computation especially computation
so
30 that makes sense let's go
i'm wondering whether i should try and
uh explain
the idea behind this since this could
really just
set me off on a tangent or just uh
devolve into incoherence and um just me
blubbering on about something i don't
really understand but um
i was interested in
adaptation in just the abstract so the
whole idea was that
um when you learn
you're just making modifications to some
cellular
cell assemblies in your brain right
you're just modifying
the strengths um of connections between
different
neurons and so on and in physical
training you're sort of doing the same
thing right uh
your let's say you go to the gym and you
do some bodybuilding right
you're going to be doing your bicep
curls breaking down those uh
muscles and then they get repaired
you're making just progressive changes
to
um the muscle structure over time
and so both of those two instances um
were so similar to me that i figured
that you could um treat them as sort of
the same thing just
um adaptation in the abstract would just
be progressive changes to some structure
um or
organic structure perhaps over time i
know i suppose not since uh you could
similarly talk about it in terms of um
computers uh you know networks
artificial intelligence as well so
it was just um can you reframe like some
of these things in terms of this
abstract
uh theory just based on uh
adaptation um amongst uh
can you reframe it in more abstract
terms and then
look at like what the similarities and
differences would be between these
different systems
could we learn anything about that so i
found this guy
john h holland right um
i think he's pretty famous for doing
genetic algorithms
perhaps and he's written this book
adaptation in natural and artificial
systems and introductory analysis
with applications to biology control and
artificial intelligence and
he's just framed i think he
yeah he's basically just
answering pretty directly this question
like
how can we just study adaptation
um in itself you know just
uh not attached to anything um concrete
and then
look at what the implications are for
those uh
for the app applications
and so what i wanted to do was to
reframe myself these were sort of
questions he posed
almost i think it was in the
introduction so to what
parts of its environment is the organism
system
organization adapting so it's like
in his abstract theory there's an
organism system or organization and it's
adapting
and it's adapting to a part of its
environment so i was going to try and
reframe that
in terms of reframing myself in terms of
human semantic learning or physical
training like bodybuilding or whatever
right and i figured that would give me
sort of it would prepare me for the
later parts of the book
and it would also just maybe generate
some original ideas about
adaptation and why it's uh useful to
study it
both in abstract as well as concrete
times
so
in terms of human semantic learning
that's
the adapting organism
maybe i should
take these terms that occur in these
questions and actually just
map out what they actually mean
within the concrete system the adapting
organism in humans and semantic learning
only is the human
i suppose if i didn't restrict it to
human semantic learning
i mean can animals learn semantic
information
that's a good question i'll leave it to
the viewer
to decide but for now let's just stick
with human semantic learning
um
uh okay so the adapting organism in this
case
is the human to what parts of it of
um humans when they learn what part of
the environment
are they adapting to
what is the environment
i think the environment is a set of
environments
the environment itself is composed of
many different environments
sub environments let's say
i always want to say that the
commonality between all of the
environments humans adapt to is that
there is some resource constraint
and that's what uh you're
progressively making changes to some
structure over time
in order to maximize the amount of
resources you have
is there any instance in human
uh humans existing in some environment
where they are not
looking to gain as many resources as
possible
i almost feel like i've not really
answered the question
maybe i'm just answering something
related but distinct
i almost feel like
adaptation change to the change to some
structure
is
done in response to some change
right the ability to adapt just means to
change
and you are doing that
in response to the environment itself
which changes
the environment changes therefore we
change
to what parts of its environment is the
organism adapting
the organism is adapting to those parts
of its environment that change
yeah i still feel like this is stated
it's not really
getting at the concrete stuff
i like this this is fun uh
i'll bump it up to five and
continue
all right
i think that's it for me today
um it was actually a really good session
actually um in particular
in particular rather the uh busbery flop
discovery was pretty cool
that was a real uh
i don't know that was a real discovery
that was really cool because uh
i've been wondering that for a long time
like how
how the meta changes and where the met
where the change
where the uh the drive to change the
meta comes from and
how does it end up changing and um
yeah so that was a really good discovery
and
yeah exploring the um adaptation thing
that was cool as well
so yeah that's going to be it for today
um i hope you enjoyed this session
um i hope it wasn't boring but if it was
let me know like i want to hear if it
was uh boring like
i have ideas for i think i mentioned
this in the introduction but whatever
i'll say again
um i have a bunch of ideas for content
related to super memory and
quantified learning and learning with
space reputation systems in general
increments of reading incremental
learning all of that stuff so
um like i want to make videos on
actually like programming um
projects like uh
i can't it's difficult to show with the
virtual machine but
um i wonder if i yeah if i was like
just over here doing my programming and
maybe i'm focusing on the programming
um and then importing items
showing you how i import items from my
programming projects into
super memory actually while i'm working
on a project and sort of the tools that
i've been developing as well like i've
got
a whole bunch of plugins and uh stuff
that i haven't released yet because
they're all in kind of a
broken state at the moment but they will
gradually be um
approaching completion so there's huge
uh endless depths of stuff to talk about
with
supermemo and whatever you're interested
in
just let me know in the comments or on
twitter
you can follow me at experia learning
so that's e-x-p-i-r-i-r
i'll put it in the description anyway
um like i just said i hope you enjoyed
this
and i'll see you in the next video